# Shining Light

Shining Light (or Shining a Light) is a structure feedback practice developed by Plum Village. Here is the summary from their book "Joyfully Together".

> Another method for Sangha building is the practice called “Shining Light” or “offering guidance”. It is based on the traditional pavarana ceremony at the close of the rains retreat, in which the monastic Sangha looks deeply into the practice of each member to let that person know how they should practice in order to make progress. Based on the terms “Buddha eyes,” “wisdom eyes,” and “Dharma eyes” found in the sutras, we have invented the term “Sangha eyes.” These are the collective eyes of the whole Sangha, which can see the truth more clearly and more deeply than the eyes of a single brother or sister and can shine light on the practice of each brother and sister.
>
> The practice of Shining Light in Plum Village differs somewhat from the traditional pavarana, or invitation practice. In the traditional ceremony, each monk (or nun) comes before an elder brother and wholeheartedly invites him to describe the shortcomings he has observed in his younger brother during the course of the three-month rains retreat. In Plum Village we sincerely invite and request every brother or sister in our own hamlet—whether they are elder or younger—to shine light on us. They not only point out our shortcomings but tell us first of all what we have excelled in. Then, they offer us concrete practices to maintain and increase our good qualities while transforming what is unwholesome. We also receive a letter that we can read to encourage us in our practice and to remind us of what we need to transform.
>
> Before each session of Shining Light we read the following letter out loud for the entire Sangha to reflect upon and to help maintain at atmosphere of mutual respect and love.
>
>> Dear Lord Buddha and all our Ancestral Teachers:
>> 
>> Today we will shine light on the practice of our elder brothers or sisters and our younger brothers or sisters. We know that all of us are the various parts of one Sangha body and that we are the bones and flesh of the same Sangha body. Knowing this, we are aware that in shining light on the practice of any one member of the Sangha we are shining light on our own practice. We vow to do the practice of shining light with all our love and understanding. We vow that everything we say will stem from the wholesome intention of reaching as accurate an insight as we can about our brother or sister and of offering concrete suggestions of practice that will help our brother or sister in the process of true transformation. We vow to avoid allowing our anger and misperceptions distort our views. We vow that every word spoken will be from a place of love within us.
>> 
>> We know that in shining light on a member of the Sangha, we are also shining light on our own being. Thus, the practice of Shining Light will also be very beneficial for each and every one of us. We ask Lord Buddha and all our spiritual ancestors to protect and support us so that this Shining Light session will be a great success.
> 
> Sangha members should not take advantage of the Shining Light practice to criticize and condemn each other. It is very important that everything we say about a brother or sister comes from a heart of love. If there is any anger or irritation in us, it is better not to speak. We are shining light on our brother because we want him to realize the highest fruits of the practice.
> 
> In the process of shining light we combine our ideas and insights. In the process of listening to others’ sharing we may modify our own ideas. Listening to our sisters and brothers share about the one receiving the shining light may help us to release our wrong perceptions about that person. Our insights are also stimulated by listening to others speak. These are important benefits of the shining light. While listening, we learn more about the reality of our brothers and sisters and also about our own reality, thus having an opportunity to understand ourselves more deeply. Usually we are able to recognize that the strengths and the shortcomings of the other person can also be found in ourselves. In this process we can reflect deeply and allow ourselves to be transformed.
>
> The art of shining light can be applied to nonsectarian groups as well. When we sit together in this way we combine our ideas and insights, and we arrive at a collective insight.
