---
title: "Contemplative Citizen Science, September 2023"
description: "In this residency we will inquire into how an extreme citizen science of contemplation can be built, bringing together the wisdom of ancient contemplative practices and the rigor of modern scientific methodologies."
image: "/assets/images/contemplative-citizen-science.jpg"
start: "2023-09-09"
end: "2023-09-15"
facilitators:
  - "Marc Santolini"
  - "Liam Kavanagh"
location: "The Life Itself Praxis Hub, Bergerac, France"
cost: " €300-600 per week, depending on room type - Food included"
apply-button: "https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdiykDKyZR6DgtPKeYuNePy9sWc-qkIc4BVfKBRjkFWKvFp-g/viewform"
created: 2023-06-22
---

> Humanity needs a kind of spirituality that we can all practice together. 
> Dogmatism and fanaticism have been the cause of great separation and war. 
> In the twenty-first century ... it will be possible to establish a cosmic religion based not on myth, belief, 
> or dogma, but on evidence and the insight of interbeing."
>
> *Thich Nhat Hanh*

Despite the real progress and headlines generated by contemplative neuroscience, 
many core aspects of the most influential and visible contemplative traditions have barely been engaged with. 
For example, it might be said that Buddhism is most distinguished by Western perspectives by its emphasis of the teaching 
that attachment is the source of all suffering, which is of incredible significance for human welfare, 
but this has been the subject of just a few studies. Within a Buddhist perspective, this likely results from both the 
not-completely graspable nature of the Buddhist teachings (the Dharma) and the imperfectly aligned aspirations of scientists and contemplatives.

In this residency we aim to address this disconnection by organizing members of the contemplative community to help identify, 
design, fund, and participate in the scientific studies of greatest importance, from the standpoint of the Buddhist tradition 
(see roadmap document for implementation details). We will inquire into how an **extreme citizen science of contemplation** can be built, 
bringing together the wisdom of ancient contemplative practices and the rigor of modern scientific methodologies. 
Through cultivating qualities such as focused attention, compassion, equanimity, and a more accurate perception of reality, 
we open up novel ways of doing science itself. By studying the concepts offered to us by spiritual ancestors as “rafts” to be “grasped” 
through appropriate methods (e.g. (neuro)phenomenology), we can introduce profound and wholesome insights into mainstream culture. 
Such a science we believe would be a great step towards the possibility outlined above by Thich Nhat Hanh. 

To unlock the full potential of contemplative science, we believe that it is essential to **involve contemplative practitioners 
in the scientific process**. We envision a space where practitioners not only share their personal experiences and insights, 
but participate in the design and execution of research protocols, and provide critical feedback on research findings. 
Imagine, for instance, experienced meditators collaboratively setting the agenda for research questions, designing meditation protocols, 
contributing their meditation data for analysis, and helping interpret the findings in light of their personal experiences. 

If we consider just one traditional notion, little investigated by science, that all human suffering stems from attachment, 
we see that research on it is potentially transformative. This notion has been tested from a first-person perspective for thousands of years, 
but has only formative scientific support. Many other contemplative notions point towards greater wellbeing and do not require consumption. 
In short, innovative contemplative engagement with science could have incredible  impacts on human wellbeing and sustainability.

The group living context of the [Bergerac Praxis Hub](https://lifeitself.org/hubs/bergerac) provides a perfect space 
to deepen our insight into these issues through both intellectual and embodied practices. 
We will also explore the potential and limitations of science for supporting spiritual practice. 
How can the vital insights of spirituality be communicated using science and contemplative inquiry? 
What new science can be done in order to help more people access ancient spiritual insights?


* **What**: A residency that inquires into how devoted practitioners and scientists can advance an extreme
  science of contemplation that is consistent with non-dual inquiry in outlook and spirit.
  We can do this best with like-minded people. We will look to refine practices together,
  and deepen our understanding of the potential and limitations of science for understanding spirituality.
* **When**: 9-15 Sep 2023, followed by a two-week residency on Interbeing to deepen the reflections.
* **Where**: [Life Itself Praxis Hub](https://lifeitself.org/hubs/bergerac), Bergerac, France (near Bordeaux, 20 min from ther Plum Village monastery)
* **Who**: anyone interested in contemplation and science. Preference given to practitioners, researchers and most especially practitioner-researchers.
* **Facilitators**: [Marc Santolini](https://lifeitself.org/people) & [Liam Kavanagh](https://lifeitself.org/people)
* **Cost** : €300-600 per week, depending on room type - Food included
* **Notes on costs**: our aim is that cost is not an obstacle to anyone in participating.
* If finance is an issue please get in touch and we will see if we can provide support in some way or another.
* **Interested**? [Apply now »](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdiykDKyZR6DgtPKeYuNePy9sWc-qkIc4BVfKBRjkFWKvFp-g/viewform)
* **Have questions?** Email: [Marc Santolini](marc.santolini@gmail.com),  [Liam Kavanagh](liam@lifeitself.us)


# Key Questions

* What would a research agenda that took Buddhism’s intellectual elements seriously look like?
  (see discussion paper [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/13b5MgPlJtHS0Y3eFg02P-uLsH1G9BdSOVqKS9ZxpwXQ/edit) and a
[roadmap document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/168E-Tv8aTh1EiBVXNlkJ7jVtH55F2c_0n0J4lk2lTgg/edit?usp=sharing) for implementation details)
* How do we create a research container (in terms of processes, community and outcomes)
  that allows devoted practitioners to pursue scientific questions without sacrificing their principles and practices?
* How can methods from self-research and auto-ethnography allow elicit a rigorous transjective non-dual science
* How can the ongoing integration of free-energy/error coding perspectives with non-dual perspectives allow 
integration of contemplative and cognitive-scientific perspectives?

# Residency Structure

The exact structure is deliberately left with some flexibility in order to adapt to the needs of the group who joins us (approximately 12 people) but some of the core elements will include:

_Work Time_: It is important to note that the schedule of the residency is meant to allow people to work remotely.

_Group Inquiry_: 3-4 evenings a week we will have a group practice or inquiry based around the residency's core theme. The organizers have ideas, but participants are encouraged to make suggestions.

_Meals Together_: Lunch every weekday. Participants will come to an agreement together about dinner and weekend cooking arrangements.

_Daily practices_: Morning and evening meditation is available, and mindful working in groups to maintain the space and cook. 


# Further Reading:

This [discussion paper](https://docs.google.com/document/d/13b5MgPlJtHS0Y3eFg02P-uLsH1G9BdSOVqKS9ZxpwXQ/edit) investigates key question 1 at length.
