---
author: [stiivi]
date: 2016-10-13
---

# Memes

A *meme*[^1] is an idea, behavior, style or anything that spreads from
person to person within a culture. Meme carries cultural ideas, symbols,
or practices that can be transmitted from one mind to another through
writing, speech, gestures, rituals, or other imitable phenomena with a
mimicked theme. Examples of memes: skills, stories, songs, fashion,
melodies, catch-phrases, methods of engineering, mindful practices.

Large groups of memes that are occurring, being copied and passed on
together are called co-adapted meme complexes, or memeplexes. Examples
of such can be cultural or political doctrines, political systems or
religions and cults – Christianity, Buddhism, Capitalism, Socialism, ...

Culture, complexes of behaviors, rituals are not easy to understand by
looking at their smaller parts. Therefore is hard to talk about meme as
a unit as it can be either a part of something larger or it can be
something composed of smaller parts. The distinction between meme and
memetic complex can not be always obvious and might depend on multiple
factors and point of views. Because of that, we can consider a meme to
be a *holon*[^2] – a part and a whole at the same time. When we are
using word 'meme' in this text we might mean either an unit or a
complex, as almost all of the discussed concepts can be applied to both.

Meme can be thought as a combination of an *idea*, and it's *behavior*
which requires context of *carrier*, *environment* and *observer*. It
also requires a condition that the behavior has effect on the
*environment* observable by the *observer*. “Memes" are not just any
ideas or thoughts – they are ideas with outward expression. We can
compare the outward behaviour and actions as a result of inward
realisation of a meme to a phenotype of a gene. The effect of the
behavior on the environment or the expression of the meme can be thought
as a "phenotype" of a meme in a similar way as an animal is a phenotype
of a gene. Thus we can consider a dam as the extended phenotype of a
beaver or culture as the extended phenotype of the collective memeotypes
of humanity.

![](../assets/notebook/meme.png)

Understanding of this concept of memes and their expression/phenotypes
helps us to understand effects of teachings and beliefs, understand
importance of how we carry out our actions – how are they observed? how
are they copied?.


## Replication

Memes are copied by teaching, imitation, sharing through digital media
and other methods. They generally replicate through exposure to humans,
who have evolved as efficient copiers of information and behavior. The
copies of memes does not have to be perfect and variation might be
introduced either intentionally or not. We can think of replication of a
meme as of a process of preservation of the meme through time.

The psychologist, Thorndike defined imitation as *"learning to do an act
from seeing it done"*. In imitation a new behaviour is learned by
copying it from someone else. We are distinguishing between simple or
spontaneous contagion and other kinds of learning or direct knowledge
transfer.

Memes persistence depend on replication, therefore the indivisible part
of the concept is the immitation. That excludes from memes things such
as perceptions, emotional states, cognitive maps, experiences in
general, or "anything that can be the subject of an instant of
experience".[^3]

It is important to note that reproduction might happen without
intention. Even economic systems or political doctrines can spread
through spontaneous contagion which might be misinterpreted for
conspiracies with a person or a group of people driving the process of
replication.


## Evolution

Original idea of memes was described from the point of view of cultural
evolution analogouts to a genetic evolution. Memetic or cultural
transmission is analogous to genetic transmission in that, although
basically conservative, it can give rise to a form of evolution.

-   Spontaneous evolution – accidental changes that give rise to new
    > qualities of memes

-   Aided or engineered evolution – intentional modifications of the
    > memes

We are not going to spend time here with the evolutionary aspect of the
memes. We just want to note that it can be observed and influenced. If
the reader is interested, we suggest reaching out for a literature which
discusses the topic in more depth.


## Memes and Immunity

Immunity is important concept of the memetic framework. There are two
kind-of competing immunity mechanisms: immunity of a meme or immunity of
a meme carrier (usually a person).

Complexes of memes, such as social systems, doctrines, religions might
include memes which purpose is to prevent foreign memes to alter core
structure and content of the complex. Example of such immune mechanism
might be written recommendation for distinction between "believers" and
"non-believers" where the later would be considered not trustworthy.

Person's ability to recognize, evaluate and then potentially reject
inclusion of memes into one's repertoire is the opposite side of the
immunity mechanism.

It has to be noted, that this might be result of very complex memetic
inventory of the person, however if can't clearly attribute the reason
for rejection or non-acceptance, we can say that it is the person's
ability to do so.

Examples of immunity mechanisms that might lead to rejection of foreign
memes:

-   Decreased trust towards foreign meme carriers as members of "the
    > other" group

-   Increased assurance about superiority of one's own memes are immune
    > mechanisms

-   Rule for not questioning the meme itself as it is.

-   Practice of non-attachment


## Application

The framework of memes can be applied or used in multiple domains, such
as viral marketing, cultural evolution, history of ideas or social
analytics.

Memes are good explanatory framework. It get us thinking about why some
ideas or behaviors are successful or what makes them good at
replication. Also helps as to recognize feedback mechanisms in relation
to memes.


## Conclusion

If we want to have effect on the world that goes beyond generation or
two, understanding this mechanism is valuable. We might have a great
idea about how the world should look like. But how we make sure that the
idea will persist in time over generations? Part of the answer is in
understanding mechanisms beyond “memes”.


## Reading

-   [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meme*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meme)

-   [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memeplex*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memeplex)

-   [*https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memetics*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memetics)

-   Richard Dawkins – Selfish Gene

-   [*http://www.baillement.com/texte-blakemore.pdf*](http://www.baillement.com/texte-blakemore.pdf)

    -   From the conclusion:

    -   *My argument has been that the definition of the meme depends
        > on, and should depend on, the concept of imitation. Therefore,
        > only those things that can be passed on by imitation should
        > count as memes.\
        > \
        > This means we can immediately exclude many things that a few
        > authors have confusingly included as memes, such as
        > perceptions, emotional states, cognitive maps, experiences in
        > general, or "anything that can be the subject of an instant
        > of experience". Furthermore we can build on the long history
        > of research in animal behaviour to distinguish imitation from
        > contagion, and from individual and social learning, and so to
        > eliminate from memetics the catching of yawns or all the many
        > things we each learn for ourselves, by ourselves.*

-   [*http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Memetics-Springer.pdf*](http://pespmc1.vub.ac.be/Papers/Memetics-Springer.pdf)
    > (from Principia Cybernetica)

    -   Rufus: A short review article arguing for the value of memes and
        > summarizing some of the more detailed concepts as well as
        > elaborating some (very limited) empirical evidence for
        > meme models.

[^1]: The word 'meme' is coined by British evolutionary biologist
    Richard Dawkins in The Selfish Gene (1976) and it is derived from
    the greek word of mimeme (imitated thing) shortened to be a
    monosyllable word sounding a bit like 'gene'.

[^2]: Unit or a part at the same time as a whole. Introduced by Arthur
    Koestler: "From the Greek holos = whole, with the suffix *on* which,
    as in proton or neutron suggests a particle or part."

[^3]: Blackmore S.: Imitation and the definition of a meme –
    http://www.baillement.com/texte-blakemore.pdf
